In *Euthyphro*, Socrates attempts to discover the definition of piety in conversation with Euthyphro, all of whose definitions either fail to meet Socrates' criteria of a good definition or fail to meet basic standards of logical coherence. In this essay, I will discuss why Socrates is interested in learning the definition of piety, what criteria he uses to reject Euthyphro's definitions, and how one such definition remains salvageable despite Euthyphro's bungling of Socrates' questioning.

Socrates, facing charges of impiety for "creating new gods while not believing in the old gods," encounters a priest, Euthyphro, who is about to confidently indict his own father for murder, an act seen to be deeply impious by Socrates and others. Socrates takes this confidence to be evidence of Euthyphro's expertise in piety, and Euthyphro himself affirms that he is "superior to the majority of men" in his "knowledge of all such things." Socrates then asks to become his pupil, so that he might learn the nature of piety and impiety and be better able to respond to the charges against him.

Not any definition will do. Socrates, while seemingly open to the possibility that piety is "not the same and alike in every action," is looking for "one form or appearance" that piety and impiety present to us. Although Euthyphro affirms that there is one such form or appearance, it is obviously unclear to him what this means, and it is only through witnessing his failures to satisfy Socrates that we ourselves come to understand what sort of definition Socrates is seeking.

Euthyphro's first definition of piety is "prosecuting the wrongdoer": what he sees himself to be doing while indicting his father for murder. This fails to satisfy Socrates, and he provides additional clarification about what sort of definition he is seeking: "Not...one or two of many pious actions but that form itself that makes all pious actions pious."  Giving an example of a pious action  cannot by itself tell us what piety is, but it does move the conversation forward -- one can ask *what is it that makes **this** an example of piety?*  

Socrates wants the definition to be a "model" that he can compare against any given act to determine whether it conforms. Attempting to take this into account, Euthyphro offers his second definition of piety: "What is dear to the gods." Unlike the previous definition, this one *prima facie* fulfills Socrates' criteria. Assuming it is possible to determine what is dear to the gods, we can hold this model up to any action and determine whether it is fittingly pious. Unfortunately, Socrates and Euthyphro have already agreed that there are disputes among the gods about the kinds of actions we'd like to evaluate. This being so, some actions will be both dear to the gods and not-dear to the gods, rendering those actions both pious and not-pious, which is self-contradictory. We can think of this self-contradiction as a violation of the "model" metaphor: it's impossible for a physical model to both model and fail to model the object it is intended to model.

A slight adjustment to this definition avoids the self-contradiction: "The pious is what all the gods love." There are two different ways of understanding this definition, both of which meet Socrates' criteria for a good definition: either we call something pious because all the gods love it, or the gods all love pious things because they are pious.

Popularity is analogous to the former option: a person can be popular for all sorts of reasons -- their abilities, their appearance, their power, etc. But which bundle of attributes cause them to become popular is accidental: essentially, all that is required for someone to be called popular is that many people like them/stay informed about them/etc. Likewise, with piety, the bundle of attributes of a thing that would cause it to be called pious would be accidental: essentially, all that is required to be pious is for it to be beloved by all the gods. 

The latter option, that the gods love the pious because it is pious, makes piety analogous to talent: a talented person is talented regardless of whether people recognize their talent. Likewise, with piety, a thing is pious regardless of whether all the gods love it -- but it just so happens that, if the definition is correct, they *do* all in fact love it.

Euthyphro fails to consistently accept either one of these options. The former case is straightforwardly defensible, though arbitrary: Certain actions would be pious because, for whatever reason, all the gods happen to love them. In a monotheistic context, this might be developed into a concept of piety oriented around the spontaneous will of God.

In the latter case, we are left in a dissatisfying state: The definition functions correctly as a model, but it picks out an inessential feature of piety. Coming back again to the analogy of piety as talent: imagine it were the case that every talented person (and no others) got to perform on Saturday Night Live. In that case, if the requirement of a definition is merely that it function as a model to distinguish the talented from the not-talented, we could say that talented people are "those who have performed on Saturday Night Live."  But this clearly fails to illuminate any essential properties of talent. We would need an answer to the obvious followup question: *why* was so-and-so deemed talented by Saturday Night Live? Similarly, with piety, we're left asking: *why* was such-and-such deemed a pious act by the gods?

None of the remaining definitions Euthyphro offers are similarly salvageable, and the dialogue ends with characteristic frustration and *aporia*. 

